Add multi tenant query federation (#3250)
cortexproject/cortex: CHANGELOG.md

## master / unreleased

> * [FEATURE] Querier: Queries can be federated across multiple tenants. The tenants can IDs involved need to be specified separated by a `|` character in the `X-Scope-OrgID` header. This is an experimental feature, which can be enabled by setting `-tenant-federation.enabled` on all components. #3250

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [FEATURE] Querier: Queries can be federated across multiple tenants. The tenants IDs involved need to be specified separated by a `|` character in the `X-Scope-OrgID` request header. This is an experimental feature, which can be enabled by setting `-tenant-federation.enabled=true` on all Cortex services. #3250
```

Author: Thanks for that suggestion. Has been added.

* [CHANGE] Querier: it's not required to set `-frontend.query-stats-enabled=true` in the querier anymore to enable query statistics logging in the query-frontend. The flag is now required to be configured only in the query-frontend and it will be propagated to the queriers. #3595
* [CHANGE] Blocks storage: compactor is now required when running a Cortex cluster with the blocks storage, because it also keeps the bucket index updated. #3583
* [CHANGE] Blocks storage: block deletion marks are now stored in a per-tenant global markers/ location too, other than within the block location. The compactor, at startup, will copy deletion marks from the block location to the global location. This migration is required only once, so you can safely disable it via `-compactor.block-deletion-marks-migration-enabled=false` once new compactor has successfully started once in your cluster. #3583

> * [FEATURE] Querier: Queries can be federated across multiple tenants. The tenants IDs involved need to be specified separated by a `|` character in the `X-Scope-OrgID` request header. This is an experimental feature, which can be enabled by setting `-tenant-federation.enabled=true` on all Cortex services. #3250

Reviewer 2: Why all? Let's be specific to avoid confusing users.

Author: I think it needs to be enabled on all Cortex services, because otherwise e.g. the write path would interpret multiple tenants as a single new tenant. Once it is enabled the write path fails as it only supports a single tenant. I have aligned the CHANGELOG with the flags description.

  - limit for incoming gRPC messages has changed from 4194304 to 104857600 bytes
* [FEATURE] Distributor/Ingester: Provide ability to not overflow writes in the presence of a leaving or unhealthy ingester. This allows for more efficient ingester rolling restarts. #3305
* [FEATURE] Query-frontend: introduced query statistics logged in the query-frontend when enabled via `-frontend.query-stats-enabled=true`. When enabled, the metric `cortex_query_seconds_total` is tracked, counting the sum of the wall time spent across all queriers while running queries (on a per-tenant basis). The metrics `cortex_request_duration_seconds` and `cortex_query_seconds_total` are different: the first one tracks the request duration (eg. HTTP request from the client), while the latter tracks the sum of the wall time on all queriers involved executing the query. #3539

> * [FEATURE] Querier: Queries can be federated across multiple tenants. The tenants can IDs involved need to be specified separated by a `|` character in the `X-Scope-OrgID` header. This is an experimental feature, which can be enabled by setting `-tenant-federation.enabled` on all components. #3250

Reviewer: We've just cut `1.6.0-rc.0`. Could you rebase `master` and move the CHANGELOG entry to the top, under the "master / unreleased" section, please?
